ARROW-13399: [R] Update dataset.Rmd vignette (#10765)
apache/arrow: r/vignettes/dataset.Rmd

---

Apache Arrow lets you work efficiently with large, multi-file datasets.

> The `arrow` R package provides a `dplyr` interface to Arrow Datasets,

Author: I think your suggestions of backticks+curly brackets around package names could be a good shout as it just makes it that tiny bit more scannable than just backticks and would help us distinguish between Arrow (the project and/or C++ implementation) and arrow (the R package).

> The `arrow` R package provides a `dplyr` interface to Arrow Datasets,

Author: Actually; just curly braces or curly braces + backticks?

> The `arrow` R package provides a `dplyr` interface to Arrow Datasets,

Author: Braces more of a Twitter/blog post thing - PR now updated with `STYLE.md` which contains some guidelines on this and suggests using the tidyverse style of things.

and other tools for interactive exploration of Arrow data.

This vignette introduces Datasets and shows how to use dplyr to analyze them.
It describes both what is possible to do with Arrow now

> and what is on the immediate development roadmap.

Author: Does it? I think we should delete this sentence but it'd be good to hear other people's thoughts on this first.

Reviewer: At one point this was true (the discussion at the end talked about what's not yet implemented but coming) but perhaps that's no longer accurate.

The [New York City taxi trip record data](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page)
is widely used in big data exercises and competitions.
For demonstration purposes, we have hosted a Parquet-formatted version
of about ten years of the trip data in a public Amazon S3 bucket.

The total file size is around 37 gigabytes, even in the efficient Parquet file
format. That's bigger than memory on most people's computers, so you can't just
read it all in and stack it into a single data frame.

In Windows (for R > 3.6) and macOS binary packages, S3 support is included.
On Linux, when installing from source, S3 support is not enabled by default,
and it has additional system requirements.
See `vignette("install", package = "arrow")` for details.
To see if your __arrow__ installation has S3 support, run:

```{r}
arrow::arrow_with_s3()
```

> Even with an S3 support enabled network, speed will be a bottleneck unless your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even with S3 support enabled, network speed will be a bottleneck unless your
```

is running, let's check whether you're running with live data:

```{r}
dir.exists("nyc-taxi")
```

## Opening the dataset

Because dplyr is not necessary for many Arrow workflows,
it is an optional (`Suggests`) dependency. So, to work with Datasets,
you need to load both arrow and dplyr.

```{r}
library(arrow, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
```

The first step is to create a Dataset object, pointing at the directory of data.

```{r, eval = file.exists("nyc-taxi")}
ds <- open_dataset("nyc-taxi", partitioning = c("year", "month"))
```

The file format for `open_dataset()` is controlled by the `format` parameter, 
which has a default value of `"parquet"`.  If you had a directory
of Arrow format files, you could instead specify `format = "arrow"` in the call.

Other supported formats include: 

* `"feather"` or `"ipc"` (aliases for `"arrow"`, as Feather v2 is the Arrow file format)
* `"csv"` (comma-delimited files) and `"tsv"` (tab-delimited files)
* `"text"` (generic text-delimited files - use the `delimiter` argument to specify which to use)

For text files, you can pass any parsing options (`delim`, `quote`, etc.) to 

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Author: I have no recollection of that but I'll have a search on JIRA and see what I can find

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Author: Had a look in the docs and I found this in `open_dataset()`: 
> additional arguments passed to dataset_factory() when sources is a directory path/URI or vector of file paths/URIs

Is this what you meant, as in it only works for certain values of `sources`, or something else?

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Reviewer 2: I was thinking about https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/R/dataset-format.R#L135-L153 bit. 

Running the code in the middle of that, I get:

```
>   # Catch any readr-style options specified with full option names that are
>   # supported by read_delim_arrow() (and its wrappers) but are not yet
>   # supported here
>   unsup_readr_opts <- setdiff(
+     names(formals(read_delim_arrow)),
+     names(formals(readr_to_csv_parse_options))
+   )
> unsup_readr_opts
 [1] "file"              "schema"            "col_names"         "col_types"         "col_select"       
 [6] "na"                "quoted_na"         "skip"              "parse_options"     "convert_options"  
[11] "read_options"      "as_data_frame"     "timestamp_parsers"
```

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Reviewer: you may want to intersect that with `names(formals(readr::read_delim))` since some of those are arrow function args

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Author: I'm confused by @nealrichardson 's comment, please can you rephrase that?

In the meantime, it looks like there are only 5 parsing options supported and more unsupported, so I feel like I'm better off explicitly listing the ones that are supported.

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Reviewer: Many of the args in `unsup_readr_opts` aren't actually from readr, they're just arguments to read_delim_arrow that aren't in readr_to_csv_parse_options. We only care about the ones that are readr options, so:

```
> intersect(unsup_readr_opts, names(formals(readr::read_delim)))
[1] "file"       "col_names"  "col_types"  "col_select" "na"        
[6] "quoted_na"  "skip" 
```

> `open_dataset()` that you would otherwise pass to `read_csv_arrow()`.

Author: Right, I get you, I think. I think that now I'm explicitly specifying the arguments that *can* be passed through rather than *can't*, I don't think I need to make any more changes here on account of the above comments?

...
```

> By providing a character vector to `partitioning`, you're saying that the first

Author: Great suggestion, being explicit about this can only help understanding.

> By providing a character vector to `partitioning`, you're saying that the first

Author: Done

path segment gives the value for `year`, and the second segment is `month`.
Every row in `2009/01/data.parquet` has a value of 2009 for `year`
and 1 for `month`, even though those columns may not be present in the file.

Indeed, when you look at the dataset, you can see that in addition to the columns present

> in every file, there are also columns `year` and `month`.

Author: Done

year=2009/month=02/data.parquet
...
```

you would not have had to provide the names in `partitioning`;
you could have just called `ds <- open_dataset("nyc-taxi")` and the partitions
would have been detected automatically.

## Querying the dataset

Up to this point, you haven't loaded any data.  You've walked directories to find
files, you've parsed file paths to identify partitions, and you've read the
headers of the Parquet files to inspect their schemas so that you can make sure
they all are as expected.

In the current release, arrow supports the dplyr verbs `mutate()`, 
`transmute()`, `select()`, `rename()`, `relocate()`, `filter()`, and 
`arrange()`. Aggregation is not yet supported, so before you call `summarise()`
or other verbs with aggregate functions, use `collect()` to pull the selected
subset of the data into an in-memory R data frame.

Suppose you attempt to call unsupported dplyr verbs or unimplemented functions
in your query on an Arrow Dataset. In that case, the arrow package raises an error. However,
for dplyr queries on Arrow Table objects (typically smaller in size than Datasets), the
package automatically calls `collect()` before processing that dplyr verb.

> Here's an example. Suppose that you are curious about tipping behavior among the

Author: Done

The other form of partitioning currently supported is [Hive](https://hive.apache.org/)-style,
in which the partition variable names are included in the path segments.
If you had saved your files in paths like:

```
year=2009/month=01/data.parquet
year=2009/month=02/data.parquet
...
```

you would not have had to provide the names in `partitioning`;
you could have just called `ds <- open_dataset("nyc-taxi")` and the partitions
would have been detected automatically.

## Querying the dataset

> Up to this point, you haven't loaded any data.  You've walked directories to find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up to this point, you haven't loaded any data. You've walked directories to find
```

files, you've parsed file paths to identify partitions, and you've read the
headers of the Parquet files to inspect their schemas so that you can make sure
they all are as expected.

In the current release, arrow supports the dplyr verbs `mutate()`, 
`transmute()`, `select()`, `rename()`, `relocate()`, `filter()`, and 
`arrange()`. Aggregation is not yet supported, so before you call `summarise()`
or other verbs with aggregate functions, use `collect()` to pull the selected
subset of the data into an in-memory R data frame.

Suppose you attempt to call unsupported dplyr verbs or unimplemented functions
in your query on an Arrow Dataset. In that case, the arrow package raises an error. However,

> for dplyr queries on Arrow Table objects (typically smaller in size than Datasets), the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for dplyr queries on Arrow Table objects (which are already in memory), the
```

")
```

You've just selected a subset out of a dataset with around 2 billion rows, computed

> a new column, and aggregated it in under 2 seconds on most modern laptops. How does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a new column, and aggregated it in under 2 seconds on a modern laptop. How does
```

")
```

This code returns an output instantly and shows the manipulations you've made, without
loading data from the files. Because the evaluation of these queries is deferred,
you can build up a query that selects down to a small subset without generating
intermediate datasets that would potentially be large.

Second, all work is pushed down to the individual data files,
and depending on the file format, chunks of data within the files. As a result,
you can select a subset of data from a much larger dataset by collecting the

> smaller slices from each file - you don't have to load the whole dataset in 

Reviewer: em-dash
```suggestion
smaller slices from each file—you don't have to load the whole dataset in 
```

memory to slice from it.

Third, because of partitioning, you can ignore some files entirely.
In this example, by filtering `year == 2015`, all files corresponding to other years
are immediately excluded: you don't have to load them in order to find that no
rows match the filter. Relatedly, since Parquet files contain row groups with
statistics on the data within, there may be entire chunks of data you can
avoid scanning because they have no rows where `total_amount > 100`.

## More dataset options

There are a few ways you can control the Dataset creation to adapt to special use cases.

### Work with files in a directory

If you are working with a single file or a set of files that are not all in the 
same directory, you can provide a file path or a vector of multiple file paths 
to `open_dataset()`. This is useful if, for example, you have a single CSV file 
that is too big to read into memory. You could pass the file path to 
`open_dataset()`, use `group_by()` to partition the Dataset into manageable chunks, 

> then use `write_dataset()` to write each chunk to a separate Parquet file - all 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then use `write_dataset()` to write each chunk to a separate Parquet file—all 
```

As you can see, querying a large dataset can be made quite fast by storage in an
efficient binary columnar format like Parquet or Feather and partitioning based on
columns commonly used for filtering. However, data isn't always stored that way.
Sometimes you might start with one giant CSV. The first step in analyzing data 
is cleaning is up and reshaping it into a more usable form.

The `write_dataset()` function allows you to take a Dataset or another tabular 

> data object - an Arrow Table or RecordBatch, or an R data frame - and write

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data object - an Arrow Table or RecordBatch, or an R data.frame - and write
```

This is another we should probably standardize on. This isn't perfect, but as a metric: I see 47 results for `data.frame` in arrow/r/man but only 5 results for `data frame`

Reviewer: Here's how I think about it when writing: "`data.frame`" is a proper noun, meaning literally that class of R object, while "data frame" is the more conceptual noun. In some cases, one or the other is obviously correct; in others, either might work.

Author: How about in this example here @nealrichardson ? I was thinking `data frame` as we're referring to both `data.frame` and `tibble::tibble` objects but then they're both of or inherit from class `data.frame ` so wasn't sure what makes most sense.

Author: This is an example of both I found and was trying to emulate: https://r4ds.had.co.nz/tibbles.html

Reviewer: I know 😞  I think I'd go with "data frame" so as to (in theory) avoid the "you said data.frame but it's a tibble" though my reasoning for picking one or the other is more about what's in my head when I'm writing, and you're right, the distinction is not perfect in the real world, nor may the reader share my distinction.

Author: I'm leaning towards this interpretation too, so have added guidance in `STYLE.md`.

Reviewer: more em-dashes

```suggestion
data object—an Arrow Table or RecordBatch, or an R data frame—and write
```
